whom we see have sided in hisbehalf.
Now we've shown our power,
let us seem humbler after it isdone
than when it was a-doing.
Here comes his mother.
Let's not meet her.
- Why? - They say she's mad.
They have taken note of us; keepon your way.
O, ye're well met.
The hoarded plague of the godsrequite your love.
Peace, peace; be not so loud.
If that I could for weeping, youshould hear
Nay, and you shall hear some.
Will you be gone?
You shall stay too.
I would I had the power to sayso to my husband.
Are you mankind?
Ay, fool; is that a shame?
Note but this, fool.
Was not a man my father?
Hadst thou foxship to banish him
that struck more blows for Romethan thou has spoken words?
O, blessed heavens.
More noble blows than ever thouwise words,
and for Rome's good.
I'll tell thee what.
Yet go.
Nay, thou shalt stay too.
I would my son were in Arabia,and thy tribe before him,
his good sword in his hand.
- What then? - What then?
He'd make an end of thyposterity.
Bastards and all.
Good man, the wounds that hedoes bear for Rome.
O, come, come, peace.
I would he had continued to hiscountry as he began
and not unknit himself the nobleknot he made.
I would he had.
"I would he had."
'Twas you incensed the rabble.
Cats that can judge as fitly ofhis worth
as I can of those mysteries
which heaven will not have Earthto know.
Pray, let's go.
Now, pray, sir, get you gone.
You have done a brave deed.
Ere you go, hear this:
As far as doth the capitol
exceed the meanest house inRome, so far my son,
this lady's husband here, this,do you see,
whom you've banished does exceedyou all.
Well, well; we'll leave you.
Why stay we to be baited withone that wants her wits?
Take my prayers with you.
I would the gods had nothingelse to do
but to confirm my curses.
Could I meet them but once aday,
it would unclog my heart withwhat lies heavy to it.
You have told them home,
and, by my troth, you havecause.
You'll sup with me?
Anger's my meat.
I sup upon myself
and so shall starve withfeeding.
Come, let's go.
Leave this faint puling andlament as I do,
in anger, Juno-like.
Come.
There hath been in Rome strangeinsurrections,
the people against the senators,patricians, and nobles.
Hath been?
Is it ended then?
Our state thinks not so.
They are in most warlikepreparation
and hope to come upon them inthe heat of their division.
The main blaze of it is past,
but a small thing would make itflame again,
for the nobles receive so toheart
the banishment of that worthyCoriolanus
that they are in a ripe aptness
to take all power from thepeople
and to pluck from them theirtribunes forever.
This lies glowing, I can tellyou,
and is almost mature for theviolent breaking out.
Coriolanus banished?
Banished, sir.
You will be welcome with thisintelligence.
The day serves well for themnow.
I've heard it said,
the fittest time to corrupt aman's wife
is when she's fallen out withher husband.
Your noble Tullus Aufidius willappear well in these wars,
his great opposer, Coriolanus,
being now in no request of hiscountry.
A goodly city is this Antium.
City, 'tis I that made thywidows.
Many an heir of these fairedifices
'fore my wars have I heard groanand drop.
Then know me not,
lest that thy wives with spitsand boys with stones
in puny battle slay me.
Save you, sir.
And you.
Direct me, if it be your will,where great Aufidius lies.
Is he in Antium?
He is.
Which is his house, beseech you?
This here before you.
I'll thank you, sir.
Farewell.
O, world, thy slippery turns.
Friends now fast sworn,
whose double bosom seems to wearone heart,
whose hours, whose bed, whosemeal and exercise
are still together,
who twin, as 'twere, in loveunseparable,
shall, within this hour, on adissension of a doit,
break out to bitterest enmity.
So, fellest foes, whose passionsand whose plots
have broke their sleep to takethe one the other,
by some chance, some trick notworth an egg,
shall grow dear friends andinterjoin their issues.
So with me.
My birthplace hate I,
and my love's upon this enemytown.
I'll enter.
If he slay me, he does fairjustice.
If he give me way, I'll do hiscountry service.
Whence comest thou?
What wouldst thou?
Thy name?
Why speak'st not?
Speak, man; what's thy name?
If, Tullus, not yet thou knowestme,
and, seeing me,
does not think me for the man Iam,
necessity commands me namemyself.
What is thy name?
A name unmusical to the Volscianears
and harsh in sound to thine.
Say, what's thy name?
Thou hast a grim appearance,
and thy face bears a command init,
though thy tackle's torn.
Thou show'st a noble vessel.
What's thy name?
Prepare thy brow to frown.
Know'st thou me yet?
I know thee not.
Thy name?
My name is Caius Marcius
who hath done to theeparticularly
and to all the Volsces greathurt and mischief;
thereto witness may my surname,Coriolanus.
The painful service, the extremedangers,
and the drops of blood shed formy thankless country
are requited but with thatsurname,
a good memory,
and witness of the malice anddispleasure
which thou shouldst bear me.
Only that name remains.
The cruelty and envy of thepeople,
permitted by our dastard nobles,who have all forsook me,
hath devoured the rest andsuffered me
by the voice of slaves to bewhooped out of Rome.
Now this extremity hath broughtme to thy hearth,
not out of hope, mistake me not,to save my life,
for if I had feared death,
of all the men in the world, Iwould have 'voided thee,
but in mere spite,
to be full quit of those mybanishers,
stand I before thee here.
Then if thou hast a heart ofwreak in thee,
that will revenge thine ownparticular wrongs
and stop those maims of shameseen through thy country,
speed thee straight
and make my misery serve thyturn.
So use it that my revengefulservices
may prove as benefits to thee,
for I will fight against mycankered country
with the spleen of all the underfiends.
But if so be thou darest notthis
and that to prove more fortunesthou art tired,
then, in a word, I also amlonger to live most weary,
and present my throat to theeand to thy ancient malice,
which not to cut would show theebut a fool,
since I have ever followed theewith hate,
drawn tuns of blood from thycountry's breast,
and cannot live but to thyshame,
unless it be to do thee service.
O, Marcius, Marcius.
Each word thou hast spoke hathweeded from my heart
a root of ancient envy.
If Jupiter should from yondcloud speak divine things
and say, "Tis true,"
I'd not believe them more thanthee,
all noble Marcius.
Let me twine mine arms aboutthat body
where against my grained ash anhundred times hath broke
and scarred the moon withsplinters.
Here I clip the anvil of mysword
and do contest as hotly and asnobly with thy love
as ever in ambitious strength Idid contend against thy valor.
Know thou first, I loved themaid I married;
Never man sighed truer breath
but that I see thee here, thounoble thing,
more dances my rapt heart thanwhen I first
my wedded mistress saw bestridemy threshold.
Why, thou Mars.
I tell thee, we have a power onfoot,
and I had purpose once more
to hew thy target from thy brawn
or lose mine arm for it.
Thou hast beat me out twelveseveral times,
and I have nightly since dreamtof encounters
'twixt thyself and me.
We've been down together in mysleep,
unbuckling helms, fixing eachother's throats,
and waked half dead withnothing.
Worthy Marcius.
Had we no other quarrel else toRome
but that thou art thencebanished,
we would muster all from twelveto seventy
and pouring war into the bowelsof ungrateful Rome
like a bold flood o'er-bear it.
Come, go in
and take our friendly senatorsby the hands
who now are here,
taking their leaves of me,
who am prepared against yourterritories,
though not for Rome itself.
You bless me, gods.
Therefore, most absolute sir,
if thou wilt have the leading ofthine own revenges,
take the one half of mycommission
and set down, as best thou artexperienced,
since thou know'st thy country'sstrength and weakness,
thine own ways,
whether to knock against thegates of Rome
or rudely visit them in partsremote,
to fright them, ere destroy.
But come in.
Let me commend thee first
to those that shall say yea tothy desires.
A thousand welcomes
and more a friend than ever anenemy,
yet, Marcius, that was much.
We hear not of him, neither needwe fear him.
His remedies are tame.
The present peace and quietnessof the people,
which before were in wild hurry,
here do we make his friendsblush that the world goes well,
who rather had,
though they themselves didsuffer by it,
behold dissentious numberspestering streets
than see our tradesmen singingin their shops
and going about their functionsfriendly.
We stood to it in good time.
Is this Menenius?
'Tis he; 'tis he.
Hail sir.
Hail to you both.
Your Coriolanus is not muchmissed
but with his friends.
The commonwealth doth stand,
and so would do, were he moreangry at it.
Where is he, hear you?
No, I hear nothing.
His mother and his wife hearnothing from him.
Worthy tribunes,
there is a slave whom we haveput in prison,
reports the Volsces with twoseveral powers
are entered in the Romanterritories,
and with the deepest malice ofthe war
destroy what lies before them.
'Tis Aufidius who, hearing ofour Marcius' banishment,
thrusts forth his horns againinto the world
which were inshelled whenMarcius stood for Rome
and durst not once peep out.
Come, what talk you of Marcius?
Go, see this rumorer whipped.
It cannot be the Volsces darebreak with us.
Cannot be.
I have record that very well itcan,
and three examples of the likehave been within my age.
Tell not me.
I know this cannot be.
Not possible.
The nobles in great earnestness
are coming all to the senatehouse.
Some news there is that stirstheir countenances.
Well, 'tis this slave.
Go, whip him 'fore the people'seyes.
His raising, nothing but hisreport.
The slave's report is seconded,
and more, more fearful isdelivered.
What more fearful?
It is spoke freely out of manymouths,
how probably, I do not know,
that Marcius, joined withAufidius,
leads a power against Rome andvows revenge as spacious
as between the youngest andoldest thing.
O, you have made good work.
What news?
If Marcius should be joined withthe Volsciansó
If?
He is their god.
He leads them like a thing madeby some other deity
than nature that shapes manbetter,
and they follow him against usbrats,
with no less confidence
than boys pursuing summerbutterflies
or butchers killing flies.
You have made good work, you andyour apron-men
that stood so much upon thevoice of occupation
and the breath of garlic eaters.
All the regions do smilinglyrevolt
and who resist are mocked forvaliant ignorance
and perish constant fools.
Who is it can blame him?
Your enemies and his findsomething in him.
We are all undone unless thenoble man have mercy.
Who shall ask it?
The tribunes cannot do it forshame.
The people deserve such pity ofhim
as the wolf does of theshepherds.
For his best friends, if theyshould say,
"Be good to Rome,"
they charged him even as thoseshould do that
had deserved his hate, andtherein showed like enemies.
'Tis true.
If he were putting to my house
the brand that should consumeit,
I have not the face to say,"Beseech you, cease."
You have brought a tremblingupon Rome.
Say not we brought it.
How; was it we?
We loved him but, like beastsand cowardly nobles,
gave way unto your clusters
who did hoot him out of thecity.
But I fear they'll roar him inagain.
Tullus Aufidius, the second nameof men,
obeys his points as if he werehis officer.
Desperation is all the policy,strength, and defense
that Rome can make against them.
Here come the clusters
that made the air unwholesome
when you cast your stinking,greasy caps
in hooting at Coriolanus' exile.
Faith, we hear fearful news.
For mine own part, when I said,"Banish him,"
I said 'twas pity.
And so did I.
And so did I,
and, to say the truth, so didvery many of us.
That we did, we did for thebest,
and though we willinglyconsented to his banishment,
yet it was against our will.
You're goodly things, youvoices.
You have made good work, you andyour cry.
Do they still fly to the Roman?
I do not know what witchcraft'sin him,
but your soldiers use him as thegrace 'fore meat,
their talk at table, and theirthanks at end,
and you are darkened by thisaction, sir,
even by your own.
I cannot help it now,
unless, by using means, I lamethe foot of our design.
He bears himself more proudlier,even to my person,
than I thought he would whenfirst I did embrace him.
Yet his nature in that's nochangeling;
and I must excuse what cannot beamended.
Yet I wish, sir I mean for yourparticular
you had not joined in commissionwith him,
but either had borne the actionof yourself
or else to him had left itsolely.
I understand thee well, and bethou sure,
when he shall come to hisaccount,
he knows not what I can urgeagainst him.
Although it seems, and so hethinks,
and is no less apparent to thevulgar eye,
that he bears all things fairly
and shows good husbandry for theVolscian state,
fights dragon-like
and does achieve as soon as drawhis sword,
yet he hath left undone thatwhich shall break his neck
or hazard mine whenever we cometo our account.
Sir, I beseech you, think youhe'll carry Rome?
All places yield to him ere hesits down
and the nobility of Rome arehis.
The senators and patricians lovehim too.
The tribunes are no soldiers,
and their people will be as rashin the repeal,
as hasty to expel him thence.
I think he'll be to Rome as isthe osprey to the fish
who takes it by sovereignty ofnature.
First he was a noble servant tothem,
but he could not carry hishonors even.
Whether 'twas pride,
which, out of daily fortune,ever taints the happy man;
whether defect of judgment,
to fail in the disposing ofthose chances
which he was lord of;
or whether nature,
not to be other than one thing,
not moving from the casque tothe cushion
but commanding peace even withthe same austerity and garb
as he controlled the war;
but one of these, as he hathspices of them all
not all, for I dare so far freehimó
made him feared, so hated, andso banished.
But he has a merit to choke itin the utterance.
So our virtues lie in theinterpretation of the time.
And power, unto itself mostcommendable,
hath not a tomb so evident
as a chair to extol what it hathdone.
One fire drives out one fire;one nail, one nail;
rights by rights falter,
strengths by strengths do fail.